[brassy big band music]
ORGANIZER: Please welcome to the Otafest 20th
Anniversary Main Stage, Mr. Matt Mercer!
(cheering)
MATT: Hi. Wow, this is surreal. I also like the
very intimate, casual lounge space here we get to
share. Just here in my den. Thanks for coming,
guys. I don't have my smoking jacket! I wasn't
prepared, unfortunately. Next time. First off,
thank you all for coming to my panel. This is
amazing! You guys all are amazing people.
(cheering)
MATT: And thank you for having me out here to
Calgary. I'm having a great time. You guys have
been phenomenal, the weather's been incredible,
it's been great. I'm super happy to be here, and
particularly for this panel! We get to discuss a
bunch of really nerdy things. As a quick heads-up,
if you have any children in the audience, I
apologize if any phrases or terminology escape
mine or the questioner's mouths that might be
sensitive to their ears. But we talk about a lot
of nerdy shit, so.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MATT: I like that. Anyway, my name is Matthew
Mercer. I am a voice actor from Los Angeles,
California. I've been into D&D, tabletop gaming,
and all sorts of crazy nerd things for the
majority of my life. I owe most of my interest in
the performing arts from getting into role-playing
games at a very young, first year in high school,
14-year old age, and I've been playing ever since.
Thanks to tabletop games, I've found the majority
of my closest friends through the years, I've
discovered more confidence in myself, I've been
able to fine-tune critical thinking skills, I've
been able to emotionally empathize in ways that I
probably wouldn't have otherwise. I owe a lot to
role-playing games, and I think a lot of people
here can probably say a similar thing, based on
the conversations I've had with a lot of you
through this weekend, and other events as well. It
means a lot to me, and the fact that we've been
able to begin doing our game on the internet in a
very scary time when we were like, "No one's going
to watch this at all!" and have this incredible
community that sprung up around us and so many
other great live play casts, and the gaming
community in general. It's been a huge inspiration
and honor, perpetually humbling, and occasionally
stressful. I don't want to spend too much time
talking off the top of my head. I want to get
questions from you guys, but first and foremost,
just a raise of hand here: who hasn't watched any
of Critical Role before you came to this panel
today? Apologies for being very confused, as you
may have been already, and will continue to be for
the rest of this panel. If you haven't picked up
on what it is yet, it is a bunch of us nerdy-ass
voice actors sitting around and playing Dungeons &
Dragons.
(cheering)
MATT: To get the question out there first, because
this comes up often, it began out of a home game
that I ran for a bunch of these voice actor
friends of mine. I've been playing for a long
time, and I've run many games and campaigns and
different systems and such, but years ago, my
friend Liam O'Brien-- we were working on Resident
Evil 6 together. He was directing it. I mentioned
my D&D game that I was running for another group
of friends, and he's like, "Man, I've always
wanted to play. I haven't played since I was a
kid!" and I was like, "I'll run you a one shot
some time! Invite some people over!" and he was
like, "Okay," and I was like, "Seriously, your
birthday's coming up. Let me do it for your
birthday." He lagged forever, but eventually got
around to going, "Okay, fine. We'll do a make-up
birthday game." We invited a bunch of mutual
friends in the industry who had mostly never
played before. I threw Taliesin in there because
he was the ringer who I'd been playing with for
years before that, and we ran a game. They were
confused, and they were laughing, and by the end
of it, they had an incredible time. What was
supposed to be a one shot turned into a continuous
campaign, and then two years later, word had
gotten around about it through conversations in
the industry. Somehow, through a conversation with
Ashley Johnson, who you saw on there playing Yasha
in the new campaign--
(cheering)
MATT: She and Felicia Day were having a
conversation about the campaign, and Felicia
basically said, "Why don't you bring this on our
channel, Geek & Sundry?" We discussed that at
length and thought that would be a terrible idea
because there was no format for it. Every time we
went into a meeting with them, they'd be like,
"You know, well, what if--" and we'd be meeting
with certain people on the production team that
didn't really understand tabletop games as much,
and they'd be like, "Well, you play your game, and
you roleplay, and then when you go to the boss
fight, you jump over to play the video game
version of D&D and you fight it in the game," and
I'm like, "No. That's not how this works." It
wasn't until Twitch began to emerge as a format
that we had a conversation. I was like, "Is there
a possibility that we can set up cameras in the
room and not change anything? We just want to keep
playing our game. You can put cameras there, and
we'll get used to it, and we'll go as we have
been. Is that okay? Can you do that?" And they
said, "We can probably do that." And that's how
the show started. We began streaming with their
Twitch channel, and we had, still at the time, a
surprising number of people. We had a few hundred
people, I think, almost a thousand at one point,
watching the first episode. I'm like, "That's
crazy! We'll never hit that number again!"
(laughter)
MATT: Three years later, we started the first
episode of the new campaign, which you just
watched, which across all platforms, when they
finished counting, we had live concurrents, not
total views, but the highest concurrent view count
of people watching at one time, was 125,000.
(cheering)
MATT: Live. As that number began to climb right
before we started the new season, we're all
sitting there at the table as they're counting
down, "Five minutes to air!" and we're all going,
"What's happening?!" It's been a very surreal
ride. It's been strange, and stressful, and
incredible. It's changed my life in so many
wonderful ways, partially just for being able to
express ourselves in a very honest light. In this
industry, in the entertainment industry, there's
very much a drive for an expectation that as a
performer, as a face of the industry whether it be
small or on a larger scale, to create a persona
for yourself, to present yourself in a
professional way, and only act this certain way,
and it feels very sterile and removed and not
true. This show, this campaign, has enabled us to
be ourselves and be friends. It's a very scary
endeavor, and we were worried, and there are, of
course, people on the internet that still get
angry. We get our fair share of hate mail, but
that comes with the territory, and that's fine.
Ultimately, the majority of the feedback has been
so positive from you guys, and the community that
sprung around this has far eclipsed what our
little show is now. We're happy to be this hub,
but seeing all of you and all the people that have
come together across the world around our little
silly, improvised narrative every week, and then
taking that inspiration and taking it to their
art, to take it to their ideas, and to their
drives and goals, to get their friends or families
together, or make new friends and create their own
stories, and then we get the chance to meet at a
convention like this, and tell each other that.
That is so powerful, and incredible, and I have no
words to describe the positive impact it's had on
my life and the life of my players and my friends,
so thank you for that. Sincerely.
(cheering)
MATT: Not many people can say they've proudly
cried on the internet multiple times in front of a
bunch of strangers, especially in a red jacket,
but that's where we're at now. We don't want to
create personas, we don't want to hide behind
something. We just want to be ourselves and hope
that that's enough. I hope at least we can promote
more of that in the world, out there. There's too
much misinformation, and falsehood, and ideas that
who you are isn't enough. I think that's so untrue
and unhealthy. It's been really scary, but very
cathartic for us to put ourselves on display in a
very vulnerable place like this, and have it be
largely accepted. It's been very therapeutic for
us, as I'm sure it's been for a lot of you. I've
met many people who in their own way, in very
similar ways, this game and this community has
helped them through a lot of hard times, as it's
helped me and a lot of us through as well.
Whatever this positive feedback loop we've
developed is can change the world in some small
way, I think we're doing it, and it's really
exciting to be doing it with you guys.
(cheering)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I fucking love you, Matt!
MATT: I fucking love you too, man! But enough of
the softie shit. We're going to talk about
Dungeons & Dragons. Because I pontificated and
splurged out onto the stage for you-- That was not
the right term to use. Immediate regret. Pulled my
heart out, that's better. Let's go ahead and bring
us to a Q&A section of this panel, because I want
to hear what you guys are curious about, and I
want to answer what questions I can, and then
laugh at the ones I can't answer, because it's a
spoiler. Which, as a note, I do want to preface
this, please. If you have any questions about
campaigns that may be spoilers to people who are
new to the series or aren't caught up, please be
careful to be vague, and not spoil those elements.
If you do, we'll figure out some sort of horrible,
painful, torturing vengeance on you. Please do
your best not to spoil that. We have a couple of
fantastic mic runners in the audience, so I'm
going to try and-- there's a lot of hands. Oh,
right over here, we have one on the side! Perfect.
Hello!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: We see the players, between
campaign one and two, choose what kind of
personalities they enjoy playing, but you play so
many different personalities. What are some of
your favorite personalities and voices to play?
MATT: You mean an archetype, like a general
archetype?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yeah.
MATT: Oh man. I mean, Gilmore's a perfect
example.
(cheering)
MATT: I like the idea of representing somebody who
is not just confident in their personality, but
confident in their sexuality, confident in who
they are unabashedly, and is eager to connect with
those that are willing to take them for who they
are. Gilmore very much represents an element of
that, inspired by somebody I knew in high school.
He's become this character that I put love into at
the beginning, but didn't expect to become such a
central part of the campaign. Well, we know how
that turned out. For me, that's definitely a
personality archetype I'd say I was drawn to
representing in that game. I really enjoy
conniving villains. Brutes are fun, big beasts are
great, terrible monstrous entities that are forces
of nature are good. I love villains that are
plotting, and weaving a web of deceit. There's
been a few in the last campaign. We're still
getting our footing on the new campaign, guys! For
those who are caught up on recent episodes, we're
starting to get into the good stuff. The
introduction is over. For me, that's another
archetype I really enjoy. It's hard to pick,
because part of the fun for me is the variety.
Part of the fun of being Dungeon Master is that
for each archetype that I play, I get to go, "Ooh,
"I haven't tried that yet! What else haven't I been
able to embody? What else have I been unable to
"represent in my world to show how diverse I want
it to be?" Those are the two that probably stand
out at the top of my head, if I had to pick, but I
enjoy them all for their own unique, particular
reasons. And weird characters with strange
affectations, (as Victor) you know the kind.
(cheering)
MATT: Thank you for the question! Where's the next
one? Oh! Hello!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi! What was your favorite scene
that you didn't have planned out in the first
campaign, and the second campaign too, so far?
MATT: My favorite-- sorry, I missed the question,
there.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Your favorite improvised scene.
MATT: Improvised scene. Oh man. I would say in the
first campaign, Victor's a great sequence that was
improvised. But for me, to really feel like I was
kicked off my chair and didn't know where we were
going, when the party decided to go to the Fire
Elemental Plane to retrieve the Plate of the
Dawnmartyr. I had assumed it was going to happen
much later and I had barely outlined the City of
Brass at that point, and they're like, "Well,
let's just go there right now. All right, let's
"go!" I'm like, "Okay! Uh, so--" notes, remembering
some of the things that I was toying around in my
head to develop that I hadn't quite put down yet
and just ran with it. The whole arrival to the
City of Brass, the encounter with the first two
guardians they came across, Senokir was a entirely
improvised NPC that I hadn't prepared. That whole
sequence of that episode was me going like, "Okay,
"let's see where this goes!" But that's also really
thrilling to me as a DM, I love those moments.
They're scary, and a lot of DMs out there will
attest to this. It's a scary thing to be in that
space, but it's thrilling. The adrenaline's
pumping, and when you're done with that session,
you're like, "That was magic!" That's the real
magic of running a game, so that definitely stood
out to me. In the newer campaign? Oh man, there's
been a few choice moments.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: (inaudible shouting)
MATT: People are shouting moments at me. The
question was for me! I answer! (laughing) Oh man.
I think whenever Fjord goes into his various--
changing his illusory form and then messing with
NPCs has been fun. For me, it's been really fun to
watch Travis go from a super dumb character to a
really intelligent, charismatic one. For me, it's
been fun to improvise with him whenever he does
things to manipulate and get information out of
NPCs, especially as a different persona. Those
have been fun. Anyway, I spent a lot of time on
this question and I'll get to the next one. It's a
good question.
MIC RUNNER: All right. Just so you guys know, you
don't have to hold your hand up the whole time.
You can put it down and put it back up again
because we're not counting who went up first. So
don't worry, don't break your arms. We've got a
question here from Stockton.
MATT: It's a good deltoid workout.
STOCKTON: Hi Matt, love the hair. I was curious,
what is either the craziest or stupidest thing
you've ever let a player get away with?
MATT: (laughing) There's some crazy ones in this
campaign. For me? It was impactful because the
moment was so intense. I ran an Expedition
Ravenloft 3.5 game years ago, and towards the end
of the campaign, they all were brought to Barovia
and all were generally functional people when they
first arrived, but as is the nature of Ravenloft,
that did not last long. One of the characters, who
was the rogue of the group-- he was a professor,
an Indiana Jones-type-- used to be a tomb delver
who gave it up as he acquired tomb rot that he's
been keeping at bay for years. The further they
went in, the more corrupt they grew, and in
Barovia, the tomb rot began to spread and he began
to become a darker entity. The bard, who my friend
Jack played, who is this pansexual Vistani, Skald,
character that, eventually, his teeth began to
sharpen from his physical corruption. Everyone got
messed up in that game. But when they defeated--
before they got to Strahd, there was a huge feud
going on between the professor rogue and the bard.
The bard was trying to tell him why his ideas were
too violent and why he needed to calm down, and
then the professor character got fed up with it
and cut out the bard's tongue. And my players were
there for it. They were like, "This is
"incredible." Jack, who played the bard, was like,
"Seriously? Let's go." So it became this struggle
back and forth, and he overpowered him onto the
ground and grabbed his tongue and cut it out and
his character couldn't talk for the rest of the
campaign. It was all gestures. Then when they
finally defeated Strahd at the end of the game,
"absolving Barovia" of the terrors of Strahd--
Reinhardt was the name of the professor--
Professor Reinhardt took the throne for himself
and became the new lord of Barovia with his
chained, silent, toady bard, Skald, sitting at the
base of the throne. It was very Game of Thrones,
it was pretty messed up. Shout out to Sean Manzano
who played that rogue, it was awesome. Good
question! All right, next one. Oh, ah!
MIC RUNNER: This gentleman's name is Matthew, he'd
like me to ask his question for him. He's
wondering, in your opinion, what was the worst
part of Fifth Edition and how did it affect your DMing?
MATT: What do I feel is the worst part about fifth
edition? Let me see. I really like Fifth Edition,
I think of all the editions of D&D that have come
before, to me, it's the most tailored to my game
style. I think it's simplified in a lot of the
rules compared to previous editions where it
allows the narrative to flow a little better. I
would say-- that's an interesting question. The
worst part of Fifth Edition is still one of the
hard parts about D&D is sometimes, the mechanical
rules can get a little fidgety when you get to the
fine print, which I get reminded of weekly
whenever any of us make a mistake on the stream
and Twitter, half an hour later's like, "You did
"this wrong!" I look it up and I'm like, "You're
right! Good job!" But it does teach me and it does
help. Sometimes I'll do research to make rule
calls and then there'd be places that confirm it
one way and others that confirm it the other and
there's a little misinformation there. They're
getting better at clarifying that as they go. I
would say that's my biggest complaint, there
aren't a whole lot. The stealth rules being a
little vague are a good and a bad thing. It's good
because it's open to interpretation to how you
want to run it in your game, it's bad for the same
reason because then you have players arguing about
what should and should not be done, and there's
countless forum threads of people arguing about
stealth. They even did a Dragon magazine post on
it with Jeremy Crawford discussing essentially
what the intended use was and even then,
everyone's like, "Peh!" The Internet's going to
Internet, I guess. But largely, I think it's a
large improvement. I will say I miss that they
removed the skill challenge system from Fourth
Edition, which is one of the good things that I
really like about Fourth Edition. I've brought
elements of it in, homebrewing it a bit. But yeah.
Thank you.
MIC RUNNER: We've got a question over here from
Milo.
MILO: Hi, over here.
MATT: There's a lot of-- Oh, there we go! Thank
you.
MILO: How do you deal with player characters that
hate each other?
MATT: (chuckling) This is a good question. Now,
the people hate each other, or the characters?
Both? Okay. Well, if you have players at the table
that hate each other, that's not good for anybody.
One of them will probably have to go, because
that's not good. They need to work out their shit!
And then bring them back to the table, and if one
or the other can't leave, maybe they need to
figure their stuff out and find some other
players, because otherwise, you're dragging
everybody else at the table through their personal
muck. That's not healthy, and that's not conducive
to a good gaming experience. That's nothing
against them individually, but if it's your table
and you're the GM and you're putting in all of
this time and energy into it, they have to respect
that to not let it affect the game. Player
characters that hate each other, you have to talk
with the players a bit. One, I would hope that the
players would be aware enough to not ruin the
narrative of the game and the fun of the players
just for the sake of what they feel is true to
their characters' feelings. There is still a
collaborative element of storytelling here. If the
player digs their feet in like, "This is what my
character would do, and I don't care how it
"affects the rest of you!" That's not a really fun
player, in my opinion. You can have strong virtues
and have conflict and have that temporary hatred
if you need it, but you still need to help add to
the narrative and keep the story moving. So that
player, it's on their responsibility to leave some
wiggle room to be open to still allowing the story
to go and maybe throttle back a bit on their
hatred. As the GM, it helps for you to work with
that player to decide why they hate that other
character, what the driving force is behind that,
and then build a story that might aid them to
surmount and overcome that difference. Maybe part
of the story and narrative-- if it's a racial
frustration between dwarves and elves, the
classic, maybe part of the story is them
discovering this ancient ruin where dwarves and
elves actually live together peacefully. The more
they uncover the information, the lore of it, they
realize that there was an older society where they
worked together very well and actually was a very
fantastic society, and their bloodlines came from
this and all of a sudden there was a history of
it. Or if one of them did something to betray the
other person, maybe there's a way in the story
down the road that they can make up for that
betrayal or prove that it wasn't intentional and
that somebody else was framing them for it. It's a
little bit of a back-and-forth responsibility if
the story calls for that. But, once again, the
player has to be willing to help the narrative
move forward in spite of it. Otherwise, it's just
not fun for anybody at the table. I hope that
helps. Next question. Ah!
MIC RUNNER: All right, this is Hailey.
MATT: Hi Hailey.
HAILEY: Hey again! I'm a writer, and I thought
maybe trying to be a DM would be fun. Any tips for
new DMs?
MATT: Yes, it's scary-- at first. Then it gets a
little less scary over time. It never quite goes
away. I'm still nervous every week before we go
up, but you learn to harness that nervous energy.
Don't think that your nerves mean that you're not
ready. Use that to your advantage, and when I say
that, meaning that natural place of anxious energy
comes with its own adrenaline in the moment. What
you do is you prepare what you can in advance and
that energy will drive you to pull from your
preparation. For me? Talk with the players
beforehand and make sure you're all on the same
page. If they're all close friends-- especially if
they're strangers, if they're people you haven't
met before, be like, "Hey guys, we're building
this story together. This is my gift to you,
"please work with me and the story, this is my
first time. Be patient and if there's any rules
"that I get incorrect, feel free to remind me of
what's in there, but don't fight me on it
"necessarily, we're all learning this together." A
little bit of prep and making sure that everyone's
on the same page and understands where you're
coming from. As far as your preparation goes, most
of it's going to go out the window anyway because
that's the nature of running a game. But beyond
producing things for your story, I recommend
having some note cards or small side prep for
random NPCs, things that aren't part of your main
narrative you're trying to build. Locations or
objects or personalities that may pop up because
in that moment where the players, all of a sudden,
veer to the right to where you have nothing
prepared, you can go, "Oh, well that's where you
"run into-- Dave the blacksmith." That little bit
of extra prep saves you in those moments where
they end up going off the intended rails. It's
okay to railroad a party when you're first
beginning, too. Don't feel like you have to build
an open sandbox and go, "Explore everything for
the first time, oh god!" As you get comfortable
with it, you'll get better at it, and the players
will understand. As long as you're having a good
time and everyone's having a good time, you're
doing it right. If you get the rules wrong,
doesn't matter. If everyone's having fun, you're
doing it right. That's my recommendation.
MIC RUNNER: All right, Matt. I'm far away from
you. Look, me!
MATT: There! Lot of hands, I'm like, "Oh god,
where'd they go?"
MIC RUNNER: We've got a question for you. If you
can stand up and introduce yourself.
JASMINE: Hi Matt! We met last night, I'm Jasmine.
I'm wondering, for this campaign, who's managed to
surprise you the most with their character and how
they act?
MATT: (chuckling) Oh, man. Laura was definitely
the biggest shift for me to go from this sultry,
strong badass of Vex into this boisterous, chaotic
entity that is Jester. That really surprised me. I
didn't know what she was going to do until we did
our first session zero for the campaign and I was
like, "What is this going to be?! Oh no! You're
the wild card, aren't you?" No, they're all wild
cards, I discovered. That surprised me initially
with the character choices. As far as their story
and things they've done, honestly, Nott's really
surprised me, Sam's Nott. Going from this what you
think is a silly voice, little goblin girl, oh,
she's so crazy! Then it has severe emotional beats
and all of this backstory that's slowly pouring
out. Nott's really surprised me, too, but all of
them have had those moments so far! Once again,
it's like picking your children, in a weird way.
Some of the characters are more of a slow burn,
and I really enjoy that, too, but as far as
surprising, those are usually the bigger shifts,
so Jester and Nott to me are the more surprising
ones definitely, but that doesn't mean I'm not
enjoying the other character narratives as much,
but yeah, those two probably. Good question.
MIC RUNNER: Way at the back. Right here.
MATT: Oh, I see.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi. As a DM, I was wondering how
far ahead and how in-depth do you usually try to
make this story and how much of the overall story
do you have before you sit down at the table?
MATT: I've been doing this for a long time. I try
to have general ideas of what the long-term story
might be. Very simple, I'll have a page in my
notes that just says, "Future story stuff," and
it's just bullet points of, "Bullet point: maybe
one day they'll fight this. Maybe one day they'll
"go here. Maybe one day they'll discover a thing."
They're super vague and open, and I can always go
back to that later when I'm fine-tuning my story
and their narrative and what I want to pull in and
flesh out. When I'm developing for an immediate
session, I consider what the main goal is that's
unifying the party, and that's the thing too, you
have to come up with a narrative that's going to
unify the party. You can do it the easy way and
say that they're already conscripted mercenaries
and they've already been working together. Or you
can be an idiot like me and have them all show up
for the first time in a tavern and find a reason
for them to come together again. Little harder,
but it can be done. But as far as prep goes, don't
get caught up in all the details of the macro
world. You can come up with vague-- we're in a
kingdom and it's either malevolent or benevolent,
and then you think of the city or the location
where the first story is happening. Then you flesh
out some of the important people in your story.
You flesh out what their goal is and who they're
going to meet along the way to that goal. What
challenges they'll uncover, and that involves not
just creatures and battles they may have, but also
what sort of physical or mental challenges they'll
come across that can give each player a chance to
shine. That's a big thing about the game is you
have a group of players and they all want to have
a moment in the spotlight, to feel like they're
useful, that they have something to give to the
party, which also makes all the other players
appreciate that person's character. "Thank God you
were here or we'd be in bad spot," that kind of
thing. So if you have a rogue in the party, think
of some way that their skill set that they chose
can be useful that nobody else in the party can
really tackle. Or if you have someone who's really
charismatic and talky, have a social encounter
where they have to extract information in a subtle
way, that nobody else in the party can do. So
consider what they players' strengths are. Give
them each a moment in the spotlight, some simple
NPCs that might be part of the story, the
encounters they might come across, and that's all
you need for your first game. That's really all
you need. The rest of it you can improvise on the
spot. Keep it simple. As long as those players
have that clear goal in mind, they'll guide the
story. Once you have that established, it will be
much easier for you to flesh out the gaps in
between. Once you get to the part where that
little town or that little section of the world
where they've been playing in for a game of two
has been set, you can begin to expand to where the
roads might go from there. Is there another town
20 miles north? Is there a passage of mountains
that leads to a dwarven citadel that's gone dark
for a year or so? Does it lead to a shoreline
where there are mermaids? Those are things you get
to think of as you expand. Don't feel like you
have to flesh it all out at once, in my opinion.
Good question.
MIC RUNNER: Okay, we've got another standing-room
question here at the back. We've got M.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi.
MATT: Somewhere back there, hi. Oh I see! Making
you work for it, sorry.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi. My question was, If you
yourself were to be in a Dungeons & Dragons world,
what race and class do you think you'd be?
MATT: What would I be, or what would I want to be?
Or both?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: What you would be.
MATT: What I would be? Probably like a human or
half-elf bard. I mean, that's...
(cheering)
MATT: My whole existence in tabletop gaming has
been trying to fight the age-old trope that
charisma is a dump stat.
(laughter)
MATT: That used to be a real thing in Second Ed.
Everyone's like, "You put points in charisma?
"You're so dumb." I'm like, with this DM, yes, but
in the future! (laughs) In the future it will come
in handy. We'll actually talk to people in other
campaigns. So yeah. Probably bard, because I'm not
good at fighting. I trip trying to get my teeth
brushed.
(laughter)
MATT: But I can talk okay. So I'll tell stories
and I'll be fine in a D&D world, until I piss off
some noble and they execute me in the middle of
the street. (laughs) Interesting question.
MIC RUNNER: Right from the aisle here.
MATT: All right. There we are.
BRIAN: Hi, Matt.
MATT: Hello!
BRIAN: My name is Brian. You will know me as
brianspinkicker, the Critical Role giveaway winner
for this week.
MATT: Yeah, you won! Congratulations, man!
(cheering)
MATT: I have not met an actual giveaway winner in
person, so that's awesome!
BRIAN: That's what I thought. That's what I
thought. Very much enjoying reading the Tal'Dorei
campaign book.
MATT: Thank you.
BRIAN: And DM to DM, what was your inspiration for
writing the book?
MATT: The inspiration for writing the book was
people asking me to write the book.
(laughter)
MATT: I never intended it to be something I put
out in the world. When I ran the first few games
of the session, all I built was Stilben, the
little swamp town where it first started. And even
then, I only built a couple of small sections of
it and some NPCs, basically the outline I told
you, was what I did for the first few games we
ran. Then I made Westruun. So I made a second
town. Then I expanded on Westruun. Then I made
Emon, and other things as it went out. But this
was all stuff that I was just making up on the
fly. My notes were just madmen scrawlings on my
computer that nobody else was supposed to read.
But as the show began to get a following, people
were like, I want to play in this world. Do you
have anything, can you put out something? And I
was like, I don't-- no one can read this.
(laughter)
MATT: Really? And so when we began talking with
Green Ronin about publishing it, I was like, okay.
All right. I'll put out a layout and oh, I have to
make all of this legible now, don't I?
(laughter)
MATT: So I had to go through all my old notes, and
rewrite everything to where another person could
hopefully read it and understand it. Like most of
the things we put out for the show, it's all
reactionary. We're all just having people yell at
us, "Make this thing," and we're like, "Okay!"
(laughter)
MATT: And the book was one of them. And it was the
scariest thing, because one, I've never made a
book before. That was new. And now I have!
(cheering)
MATT: And it's crazy! And when it was coming out,
I was like, what if they hate it?
(laughter)
MATT: What if I'm like, "I made a book," and
they're like, "Burn it!" I'm like (scared noise).
So I was genuinely very scared. I was very nervous
about it going out there, because it was my first
time and because I didn't know if it was going to
be any good, so I was very happy that people seem
to like it.
(cheering)
MATT: But yeah, I mean honestly, like a lot of
things, the inspiration was you guys. It was you
guys asking, and me going, maybe I can do this,
and I did, so thank you.
(cheering)
MATT: You push me to be better.
MIC RUNNER: We're in your sightline, I think.
MATT: Oh, haha.
MIC RUNNER: All right, we've got Michaela here.
MATT: Hello.
MICHAELA: Hi. Related to your last topic, do you
have any tips on how to get your own material
published if you're creating your own worlds and
everything?
MATT: Oh. I made a book.
(laughter)
MATT: To get your stuff published, a lot of these
people I know and who I've talked to have been
doing this for a while, is to first maybe start
small scale publishing, which things like the DMs
Guild are really good places to start making a
name for yourself, where you can just self-publish
work, for Fifth Edition D&D, put it out there, and
people can try it, give their feedback, make a
little money off of it. And through that, you can
use those tools to begin applying to publishers,
like Cobalt Press, Green Ronin. These are the
companies that do third-party stuff and
eventually, the main publishers of these RPGs out
there. You can maybe do stuff for World of
Darkness or do things for Savage Worlds or D&D.
But it's hard to publish if you don't have
anything to show that you've put up yourself in
this day and age. It's the classic, in order to
get a deal, you had to have had a deal. Well, that
doesn't work, but that's how it is. It's kind of
how getting into the acting union was. You can
only get into an acting union by doing a union
job, and you can't do a union job unless you're in
the union. Like, what?!
(laughter)
MATT: So you have to find those back roads by
meeting people, putting your work out there, and
showing what you can do, and prove and show to
somebody that you actually have what it takes. You
have the moxie, kid, that kind of a thing. But now
we have so many more resources online for
self-publishing then there ever was. It's a great
time to start putting your stuff out there. The
key is to make sure that you can get it to the
community, because it can also get lost in the sea
of self-published stuff. So, honestly, reaching
out to a lot of those publishers, showing them
what you've done, and then once you have a
rapport, it will be much easier for you to get it
to one of these publishers anything you want to
do. It's going to be hard to publish your own
original setting as an initial thing, unless
you're Kickstarting it, and you have a lot of
followers ready to go ahead and get behind that.
So you want to kind of build up that rapport with
a publisher, doing stuff for them, and then you
can kind of delve into your own, whole projects.
That's my suggestion. No worries.
MIC RUNNER: To your right, close to the back. Over
here.
MATT: Haha. Hi. I get excited whenever I find you
guys. It's like my own little Where's Waldo game.
(laughter)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: My girlfriend and I are actually
trying to start our first Dungeons & Dragons
campaign. I was wondering if you could suggest any
pre-built campaigns we could start with.
MATT: What kind of style of game do you like? Do
like super high fantasy? Do you like
gothic horror? Do you like more intrigue and
mystique? What kind of story do you want to tell?
AUDIENCE: [inaudible]
(laughter)
MATT: That is a-- although, any of them can be
that genre.
(laughter)
MATT: That's not a genre.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Her and I are actually more into
the gothic horror fantasy--
MATT: Curse of Strahd.
(laughter and cheering)
MATT: That game I was talking about earlier where
the guy cut the other guy's tongue out? The Curse
of Strahd is the newer version of that whole
storyline. It's completely renovated. It's very
dark fantasy, mist-filled forests and vampires
and werewolves and undead and it's great.
Basically Dracula. It's (mwah). Curse of Strahd
would be a great place to start looking for
inspiration, and if not inspiration, to actually
run the module. So highly recommended.
MIC RUNNER: Okay, I'm just here sort of
kitty-corner to where Alfred just was.
MATT: Ahaha. There we go.
MIC RUNNER: With the mask, this is Alexis.
MATT: Hi, Alexis.
ALEXIS: Hi, so a little detour. With Pillars of
Eternity II out, what's your favorite character
line from the original?
MATT: Favorite character line from Pillars of
Eternity? Oh man. There's a conversation between
Sagani and Eder that's amazing. For those who
haven't played Pillars of Eternity or Pillars of
Eternity II, first off, great game series. I
backed the original on Kickstarter before I was
even cast in it, which was very surreal. I grew up
playing Baldur's Gate, Planescape Torment, the
classic isometric RPGs of the PC realm of the
2000's, so as soon as they began doing Pillars of
Eternity, I was like, take my money, (nyuh).
(laughter)
MATT: And they put it back in, by hiring me as
voice actor. That was kind of cool how it worked
out. (laughs)
(cheering)
MATT: But it's a great story, and I play two
characters in there. I play Eder and Aloth. Aloth
is this "Elven mage persona who's a bit nervous
and just wants to cast his spells, who has another
"soul within his body, who is named Iselmyr, who's
this 'Old sort of Scottish angry lass, who beats face.'"
(laughter)
MATT: "I'm sorry. That was Iselmyr. That wasn't
me. I can't really control it." And the other's
Eder, who's this kind of like "This good old boy. He's a
farmer in the Dyrwood who became a soldier for a
"war and his god was killed in the war, and so he's
just kind of trying to find what his next path in
"life is. And he loves to pet animals."
(laughter and cheering)
MATT: He loves animals. And there's this
conversation with Sagani, who's this dwarf ranger,
who has this awesome fox companion, where he's
walking and says, "Hey, Sagani, can I pet your fox?"
(laughter)
MATT: And she goes, "Well it's your hand." And he
goes, "I'm going to pet him."
(laughter)
MATT: And then later on, as you're playing
through, another conversation happens comes up and
she goes, "Eder, how's the hand?" He goes,
"Turning purple."
(laughter)
MATT: "Might have to cut it off." And she goes,
"You shouldn't have pet him." He's like, "If I
"wasn't supposed to pet him, why did they make him
so soft?"
(laughter)
MATT: That's my favorite Eder line.
MIC RUNNER: That's awesome.
(cheering)
MATT: Which, if you don't know, Pillars of
Eternity II. Not only are the whole cast of
Critical Role voicing a lot of the companions and
main characters in the story, but there's a free
DLC for the game where you get to download voice
sets and portraits of Vox Machina from our first
campaign, and make them in the game--
(cheering)
MATT: --which is so surreal! Including Shaun
Gilmore. That's one of the most surreal moments of
my life, was playing a video game, where our D&D
characters were technically in it. I might have
gotten a little emotional. (laughs)
MIC RUNNER: Right at the front.
MATT: Oh, look at that. Convenient. Hi.
ALANA: Hi, my name is Alana and I was wondering if
you've ever brought a character from other roles
you've done, like through your games and voice
acting, into Dungeons & Dragons.
MATT: It's kind of the other way around (chuckle).
(laughter)
MATT: A lot of voices that I've learned and
acquired for my work as a voice actor, started as
NPCs. You know, being a dungeon master, for me,
was a great playground to build my toolbox of
dialects and character voices and ranges. But for
instance, in the new campaign, Pumat Sol--
(cheering)
MATT: That voice stemmed from a cartoon that I
worked on, where they wanted a character voice
that sounded kind of like a very happy,
lackadaisical kind of good old Minnesota type boy.
And I kind of, (Pumat voice) "Kind of sort of just
came up with this guy."
(cheering)
MATT: "And so when I was designing this NPC for
The Invulnerable Vagrant, and I wanted to bring a
"firbolg into the campaign, I was like, what would
a nice firbolg enchanter sound like? That's what
"he'd sound like."
(laughter)
MATT: "Respectfully."
(laughter and cheering)
MATT: So that's an example. I'm trying to think.
It goes back and forth, it's hard for me to
really point it out. I know Gilmore's slipped into
a few things, because it's hard not to. I lived
these characters so much for a while, I'm pretty
sure I'm this close to clinical multiple
personality disorder and proud of it. (laughs).
Good question.
MIC RUNNER: Right here.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi Matt!
MATT: Oh, here we go! Thank you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi. We actually met last night. I
was the asshole that didn't know the rule, that
you shouldn't ask the voice actor to do a voice.
My bad. I wanted to know: Obviously, you're
writing a lot of your own stuff. What kind of
authors or media you take most inspiration from?
MATT: I mean it's hard not to draw from Tolkien
because I grew up loving the Lord of the Rings
books so much. They influence so much to what the
genre of fantasy is and I grew up as a fantasy
kid. I like Star Wars, but while all my friends
were Star Wars kids, I was a Tolkien kid. They
were like, "Let's watch Star Wars for the seventh
time," and I'm like, "That's cool. I'm going to
read Two Towers for the seventh time." I'm going
to play my MUD for an entire summer. If anyone
here who knows what a MUD is?
(cheering)
MATT: We're old! He's been a huge influence as
well, I have a biography on him in high school and
everything for my English class. Really
interesting history, Tolkien. You don't realize
how much The Silmarillion and the world of Middle
Earth, the genesis of it was during World War I
when he was in the trenches. He was creating his
own Anglo-Saxon mythology that he didn't think
existed and outside of King Arthur, it was the
closest thing England had to a mythology was as
opposed to Grecian, Roman, and all these Norse
pantheons that were so great. That was an early
genesis for The Lord of the Rings books. Sorry,
I'm going to a whole different panel there, whoa.
Anyway, fascinating backstory to Tolkien if you
have the opportunity. Other authors that have
really inspired me. Neil Gaiman, he's
incredible and sent me and Marisha a wedding gift.
(laughter and cheering)
MATT: That was surreal. I got in a Twitter
conversation with Amanda Palmer, his wife, because
I've been a fan of hers since Dresden Dolls in the
mid-2000s and after a brief conversation she's
like, "What's your address?" and she found out we
were getting married and mailed us a leather bound
special edition of Stardust signed by both of them
and that will be in my family forever. He's great.
In the comics realm, Brian Michael Bendis is great
writing. He left Marvel (fake crying). I get it. I
read a lot of Piers Anthony growing up. I really
loved Piers Anthony when I was a kid and as I got
older, looking back on it: it doesn't hold up.
There's a lot of sexist things in there I didn't
understand as a kid, that I'm like, "Aw, buddy."
This didn't age well, but that happens, I guess.
Asimov, Arthur C. Clarke, some great sci-fi
authors of the 60s and 70s. I actually really
enjoyed the Myst books that came out based on the
Myst game.
(cheering)
MATT: Yeah, we're old too! That should be plenty.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thank you.
MATT: Thank you.
MIC RUNNER: All right, so just me here, I've got
two more questions, so all of you who have your
hands up you can put them down. We've got them
selected, thank you. Also just to note, I'm going
to get a wave from Matt's team here. If you guys
do have gifts and stuff, they are up in the front.
You can come up and give them to these gals now if
you have something, otherwise we're going to move
on to our last two questions for you, Matt. So
first one is with Scott. If you would stand up and
ask your quick question.
SCOTT: I was just wondering out of you as a player
if you've ever played D&D and a dungeon master,
which is a favorite character you've played and
why?
MATT: Good question. I tend to be drawn towards
spell casters because I like the utility of
options. I don't go for the high damage, the max
DPS. I want to be useful for the party and so I
often fall into clerics or wizard roles and pick
spells that are more utility. In fact, Caleb in
our later campaign is starting to go in a similar
utility route and I'm like, "Yeah, buddy, yeah!" I
think, in spite of that, one of the characters I
had the most fun playing because I played spell
casters my whole D&D life, which I DMed for the
most of it, so players have a druid, a cleric, and
a few wizards. For my friend Sean, who played that
rogue who cut out the tongue earlier, he was DMing
a Fourth Edition campaign when it came out and I
was like, Fine, you know what? I'm going to try a
martial class, I'm going to make a fighter, a
dwarf fighter. Just to give it a shot. God, he was
so much fun. I used to make fun of fighters, I was
like, "Fighters aren't fun; all they do is
attack." But oh man, so much freedom in how you
get to describe those attacks. It was so much fun
to be ridiculous. Your turn comes around. "All
right, as I sit there heaving angrily, staring
"with my one good eye into the face of the orc I
say (spitting), 'Come on, sir, let's see who
'topples first! Hehehe!' As I run up the front of
his body and cleave my axe into his shoulder. As I
"flip over the back I try and wrestle it from the
side of his arm, kick him behind and as he falls
"to the ground I turn back and go, 'Ha ha, got
you.'" All it was was two attacks, but it was so
much fun to get into it. As a person who grew up
watching martial arts movies and mixed martial
arts and a lot of old school kung fu films, it's
really fun to be able to, in your mind,
choreograph these fight scenes and martial classes
allow that flexibility that I really love. So I've
probably had the most fun with my fighter than I
thought I would and he became an NPC in Tal'Dorei,
he's actually a member of the Brawler's Guild who
was first the manager of Vox Machina pre-stream.
He's in the campaign guide. Kradin Grimthorne, that
was my dwarf fighter.
MIC RUNNER: All right, we're still at the front.
We've got our final question and it's Jordan.
MATT: Hi Jordan.
JORDAN: Hi Matt. DM to DM, how much input do you
have on your characters' backstories or your
players' characters' backstories?
MATT: That's a good question. What I usually do is
give them a primer for the world they are going to
be playing in. It can be detailed, it can be
vague. Now I do, at least. With a one-shot
campaign, I'm like, Make whatever and I'll
incorporate into the story; it wasn't meant to be
a campaign. But for this campaign I sent them an
email that had some primers on the Dwendalian
Empire, the tension at the Xhorhas border, some
information about the general infrastructure of
the Menagerie Coast, and that was all. I said,
TThis is some information of the world your characters
would have known no matter where they came from.
Which gave them some guidance to where they wanted
to come from, that way it allowed for Jester and
Fjord to say they came from the Menagerie Coast.
It allowed the other characters to decide if they
were from the Empire and what cities they may have
been near. They made up cities in their background
that I incorporated into the map, because beyond
that, I didn't have any input. I let them create
their backstory and when they sent their backstory
to me, if there's any part of their backstory that
didn't quite fit with the way I was building the
world, I would find a way to tie it in. For
instance, this is a complete example, if their
backstory was "I was born from a noble that lived
in a golden tower and summoned dragons." I'd be
like, "What if that was what the noble wanted to
do, but couldn't do yet?" We would scale anything
that went too far, but didn't really need to do a
lot. It was more of just me offering the backdrop,
they give me the backstory, and I take that
backstory and tie it in to some of my more
detailed world buildings so they felt like what
they created locked in and became part of the
breathing world and then we took it from there. I
want it to be a collaborative thing, I want it to
feel like the players have had input on the world
we're creating. It helps them feel more invested,
if ever they get the opportunity to tie into parts
of their backstory, or when elements of their back
history come into play or are threatened, they
have a personal stake in it. Nothing gets a player
more motivated than finding out their hometown is
suddenly under threat. That's a great gift for a
DM to eventually drive the story forward and get
the players invested. That's my suggestion. Thank you.
(cheering and applause)
MATT: I wish we had more time, I really do. This
has been a lot of fun.
AUDIENCE MEMBERS: [inaudible shouting]
MATT: (laughing) Hmm. Aww. You guys are so sweet.
But no, thank you guys for sitting here staring at
me while we talked Dungeons & Dragons into your
face. In fact, that's a thing that could happen,
that exists and you guys are cool with it and you
didn't leave en masse at the beginning of this
panel means that the world is changing for the
better!
(cheering)
MATT: Unfortunately, this panel comes to a close.
It's been an absolute pleasure. Thank you so much
for bringing me here, letting me be apart of this
wonderful Otafest 2018. You've been wonderful.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Love you!
MATT: I love you too, guys.
(cheering)
MATT: I'll leave you with a thank you, a humble
appreciation for what you bring to this community
and continue to prop each other up, because at the
end of the day all we really have is each other.
Thank you, guys.
(cheering)
[elevator music]
MATT and MARK:  I say, "I want it that
way!" We are two worlds apart. Can't reach to your
heart when you say, "I want it that way!" Tell me
why! Ain't nothing but a heartache. Tell me why!
Ain't nothing but a mistake. Tell me why I never
want to hear you say, "I want it that way!" Am I
your fire, your one desire? Yes I know it's too
late, but I want it that way. Tell me why! Ain't
nothing but a heartache. Tell me why! Ain't
nothing but a mistake. Tell me why I never want to
hear you say, "I want it that way!" Now I can see
that we've fallen apart from the way that it used
to be, yeah. No matter the distance, I want you to
know that deep down inside of me: You are my fire,
the one desire. You are (you are you are you
are!). Don't want to hear you say ain't nothin'
but a heartache ain't nothin' but a mistake I
never want to hear you say--
[elevator music]